The Joe Rogan experience. I mean, if you do get to do this,
here's another problem. Okay. Here's a, is a big one for the ocean.
We are depleting it of seafood of life. I mean, we, you know, I had, um,
how do you say his name again? SA hoes, right? Louis SA hoes who, uh,
directed the Cove on. Yeah. And we were talking about out, um,
the replenishing replenishing of the wildlife in the, in the ocean.
And when you start looking at it on a grand scale,
like how much fish they're pulling outta the oceans, it's very sobering,
you know? Sure.
Maybe you can come up with a way to replenish fish in the ocean so
we can continue eating sushi. What do you think?
<Laugh> so I,
so maybe just zoom out a bit and realize,
so what is so because of course plastic pollution, you know,
climate change overfishing,
I think it's all part of one big problem to make civilization sustainable. And,
um, the, the way I look at it is that, of course,
over the past 200 years, humanity has made tremendous progress. So of course,
since agriculture re revolution, 10,000 years ago, um,
no has been kind of stagnant, no progress, or just very,
very slow progress. Number of people, um, lifespan,
it was all kind of flat, nothing really happened. And then since the,
the Dawn of the industrial revolution and when we learned how to utilize science
and, and our knowledge, uh, collective knowledge to, um,
to turn that into progress, um,
basically every possible metric for humanity has
improved tremendously. And if you think of wealth, health, violence,
education, uh, rights, all these things,
I know you've had Steven Pinker on he's,
he's much more knowledgeable on that topic than, than I am, um, yet.
Um, so, so truly at this point in time, uh,
it has never been a, a better time to be alive for humans than, than today.
Not saying that it can't get better, but we have made tremendous progress,
uh, by one hand, um, imagining things that don't exist yet.
So inventing technologies and also inventing, uh, institutions.
And on the other hand, uh, our human ability to,
to collaborate effectively in large numbers, uh, which includes, you know, the,
the corporation, which is a very effective way for, for people to,
to work together. Now,
all that progress has always has also had its negative side effects,
which are most pronounced, of course, in the area of the environment where, um,
I think we, we put things into an environment that,
that shouldn't belong there and we take too much out of it,
then they trick can replenish, which includes, you know, the fish.
And on the other hand, you have the plastic going into the environment,
et cetera. So, uh, so then the question is, well,
how do we solve that? And of course, one hand is to say, okay, is kind of the,
the, yeah, maybe Lou diet is maybe a bit of a negative way to,
to phrase it, but the sort of reactionary approach of saying, okay,
we should consume less. Um, you know, corporations are bad. Technology is bad,
we should all get rid of all those things. And, um, I think, you know,
the environment, modern environmental movement,
which is really kinda this romantic movement, has this image of back in the day,
everything was great. And we lived in harmony with nature.
So let's get rid of all this modernity and try and return to that pure original
state. What I, however, believe is that, first of all, that's,
I don't think it's a very realistic, you know,
people want to keep their iPhones and their cars and, you know,
people want to move forward. Um, and at the same time,
I don't think it's really the most effective way to,
to solve these problems because, you know, it would be like fighting a,
a leper tank with, with bone arrow. Uh, you know,
technology is nothing more than an, an, an enabler of human and capabilities.
It, it enhances our power.
So why not use that power to also try and solve these, these, these,
these problems as well.
So rather than try and reject business reject technology,
I truly believe that we should embrace those,
those forces that make a human and,
and has created this amazing world to also try and solve these,
these negative side effects as well. And that's why I believe, you know,
the over,
over consumption of fish is not going to end like people all becoming vegan,
but rather through, um, you know, fake meat. Uh,
I think that the, uh,
transport emissions are not going to be solved by people not flying anymore or
not going anywhere anymore. Realistically people are going to fly more.
So we better invent technologies that allow people to do that without harming
the environment. And, um, you know,
the same thing I think would be the case for, for, for, for plastic and,
and really other energy uses as well.
No, I think that's a very wise way of looking at, and it's a,
it's a hopeful way of looking at it. And it's funny that
today you kind of have, even though you're, you're,
you're dealing with statistics and factual information,
like the fact that it is safer to live today, there's less violent crime.
It's easier to get by this more technology, more innovation, medical improve,
radically, all these things are true, but you still have to say,
it's not where we want it to be. Right. I'm not saying that the world's,
you have to say that even you like, even though you're, I mean, look, it's,
it's the worry about people barking at you,
so worry about people it's still terrible and parts of the world,
it's still terrible for people have color.
It's still tell terrible for trans it's still I get it. I get it. I get it. No,
one's saying that there's not room for improvement,
but you have to say that like you, even though you felt compelled, you're like,
it's still not perfect. Yeah.
And I, I wonder why it's so, so controversial. I,
I think it's important to, um, learn from the things that we do well,
and then apply that. I.
Don't think it is that controversial. I think it's a trick. I think, uh,
there's just a lot of people looking for every single opportunity to complain,
even to someone like you whos, you know, objectively done nothing but good.
You say one thing, I mean, Steven Pinker took a ton of heat for saying that.
And even though he's talking about actual scientific statistics, he's just,
he's not saying the world's perfect and everyone should shut up.
What he's saying is we should look at this, you know, from a, a bird's eye view,
look down and understand it. Although there's much work to be done,
we're in a great place in comparison to the rest of human history.
Sure. And it's, it's helpful to realize that progress is possible.
Just imagine that every there's something, um,
that feels intuitively right,
as if every step forward would also have to equal a step backward
elsewhere. Yes. And I don't think that's, that's the case.
There's plenty of things that you can invent that, um, that, that are,
are not that like, and, and we see it for example, with,
with carbon right now that there's countries where, you know, like,
like Sweden GDP has grown a lot past 20 years, carbon emissions has gone down.
So, um, they call that the, the decoupling.
And I think really the, the main challenge in,
in this century is to, um, you know, decouple, um,
human progress from, uh, from those negative side effects.
And I think the way to do that is not reactionary. It's really, again, um,
through innovation and, um, through to collaboration.
I, I agree with you.
And I think that a lot of times people just assume that this is,
these are the consequences of innovation that there's a pro and a con to
everything, because there has been so many things,
there have been so many things that are inventions that were,
there are a pro and a con to it. Right.
But that doesn't necessarily mean it has to be that way.
No. And even if things have a pro on a can,
it doesn't mean the pro is as big as the con. Right. So, um,
and if that would be the case, all the technology,
every technology would be neutral and it wouldn't Ima it wouldn't matter what
your event, uh,
but it would mean that an atomic bomb is
morally as neutral as an ocean cleanup system,
which I just don't find plausible.
So I do believe that inventors entrepreneurs,
they put certain morality into their creations, into their technology.
There is, um, you know,
there is a certain use that you prescribe with your invention. I mean,
you don't use nuclear bombs to, um, wash your car, right. I mean,
you use it, not for benign uses, unless maybe you want to Terra for Mars, which,
you know, some people propose to do with atomic bombs. I don't know.
What's a good, um, but, um, yeah, I,
I don't think technology is neutral that it has a morality.
So what that means is, is that as long as we conent, uh,
consistently develop net positive technologies, you know,
eventually, you know,
the world does get better and better if say a technology is 60% good and
maybe has 40% downside and okay.
But then we can invent a solution for that 40%. And maybe that's again,
net positive and you kinda get this, this cascade of,
of ever improving world.
No, I, I think what you're saying sounds beautiful.
And if more people thought the way you're thinking, I think, uh,
the world be a better place. I, I like the, the positivity. I like the optimism.
And what, what you're thinking in terms, particularly in terms of what's,
what's possible with innovation. Yeah.
Well, I, I just don't think that being against something is very
productive. Mm-hmm <affirmative>, um, I, yeah, it's,
it doesn't really move us forward. Um, so
rather than, you know, protesting against the things that I don't agree with,
and there's certainly things I, I don't agree with. Um, but again,
I don't think it's, it's very helpful rather than doing that.
I much rather built towards the future that I, that I do agree with.
Listen, man. I think what you're saying is very, very logical.
I wish more people thought like you, you're a great role model for a lot of, uh,
kids to use your energy in a positive direction, you know, can,
it can be done. Yeah. Um.
Sure. I mean, I think we agree with your journey.
Yeah.